<!-- Page 1 -->
CHAPTER6
Monetary Policy
6.1
OBJECTIVES OF MONETARY POLICY
Monetary policy is the active control of financial conditions by the central bank. It
now generally has the objective of ensuring that the domestic currency has the qual-
ities associated with money, i.e., that it can serve as a unit of account, store of value
and medium of exchange. This objective generally requires that the future purchasing
power of the currency can be anticipated by the general public and that the techni-
cal means of exchanging the currency (banknotes, electronic payment systems) work
reliably. Modern monetary policy therefore tends to be geared towards some form of
price stability which can be defined in various ways. In the policy mode known as infla-
tion targeting, price stability is defined as a given positive inflation rate (zero inflation
is undesirable due to measurement issues and asymmetric risk concerns [9]). In the
related price level targeting approach, the central bank defines a target path for the price
level and therefore explicitly commits to compensate any past deviations in the future.
This commitment is at best implicit in inflation targeting. Over time, both the under-
standing of price stability, and the best way to express it, have evolved across different
central banks.
Some central banks, for instance the US Federal Reserve and Reserve Bank of Aus-
tralia, operate on a mixed mandate that targets the correlated but distinct aims of price
stability and maximum employment.
The existence of a monetary policy target suggests that monetary policy is essen-
tially a control problem, and some central bankers have indeed sought to describe their
approach in such terms. The idea of reducing economic problems to the solution of
mathematical equations could be linked to the suggestion by Karl Marx that ‘a science
can only be considered to be fully developed when it reached the stage where it can
utilise mathematics’. In practice, the large number of parameters such a model would
have to incorporate, while the number of observations is limited by the low frequency
of collection of the relevant data, precludes the proper calibration of such an ambitious
model. In addition, it may be incorrect to assume that central banks have sufficient tools
to act in an optimal way even if they had sufficient information.
One can indeed argue that the existence of a complete model of optimal mone-
tary policy under a rational expectations framework would in fact contradict the idea of
active monetary policy. By way of reductio ad absurdum, if a complete model existed, it
would eventually be known to all economic actors. The central bank would under these
40

<!-- Page 2 -->
Monetary Policy
41
FIGURE 6.1
Example of a Japanese castle wall (Osaka Castle). Source: ALEXANDER DÜRING.
circumstances not have any way in which to influence the decisions of others, having to
follow a policy path that is known to everybody else1. In essence, this would be a world
of real business cycle models where the only uncertainty stems from random jumps in
productivity.
This raises the question whether the absence of a perfect monetary policy approach
is a drawback for the economy. The answer is not immediately obvious and instead
depends on one’s economic model. Followers of the Minsky theory of the business cycle
[58] would argue, for instance, that the shocks generated by occasions when monetary
policy decisions later turn out to have been mistaken can flush out elevated leverage
before it becomes excessive.
An illustration of this idea can be found in the construction of Japanese castle walls
(Figure 6.1). Unlike European castles, the slope of Japanese walls becomes progressively
steeper towards the top. The common justification for this design is that it creates an
adverse selection process for attacking soldiers attempting to climb these walls. Less
capable soldiers are likely to fail close to the bottom and may sustain minor injuries
when they fall. The most capable soldiers will not fall off the wall until they reach a
height at which their fall will result in major, or even fatal, injuries. The wall design
therefore selectively apportions the maximum damage to the most dangerous enemies2.
In the realm of monetary policy, a central bank may be able to offset incoming shocks
1In economics, these arguments are known as the Lucas Critique (historical correlations are not
a good guide to future reactions to monetary policy) and Goodhart’s Law (an indicator becomes
non-informative when it is chosen as a policy target).
2An unkind observer with a mind focused on physics might argue instead that the inward slope
offsets the pressures generated by a quasi-liquid soil in case of an earthquake, and that the absence
of this consideration in Europe explains the special design of Japanese castles. However, a per-
fectly reasonable alternative explanation is no excuse to dismiss a good story.

<!-- Page 3 -->
42
PRELIMINARIES
to the economy by a well-executed monetary policy path. However, this could leave the
economy even more exposed to shocks that are either beyond the capacity of the central
bank to react, or could not have been foreseen by the central bank.
The lesson of the Japanese castle wall is that there is a trade-off between the steady
state performance of an economy and its resilience to shocks. A central bank that can
hold its economy close to a state of maximum output (however defined) may find that it
is least able to prevent sharp deteriorations in economic conditions simply because there
is more room to fall. In other words, the longer an economy grows beyond potential, the
more time there is to build up excessive risk positions.
Put more bluntly, active monetary policy may have a purpose not because it is
always right but precisely because it may on occasion be wrong. Authors like Cooper
[26] who perceive a conflict between the notion of efficient financial markets on one
hand, and the need for a central bank on the other, may therefore be missing two impor-
tant points. First, the provision of money by central banks needs to be carefully managed
to endow this money with the qualities expected of it, namely its role as a store of value.
If this non-trivial management is not provided in a reliable fashion, markets cannot
work. Second, even if the central bank occasionally makes mistakes in this manage-
ment, these may not always have negative long-term consequences.
That being said, central banks tend to interpret their mandates as leaning against
the business cycle instead of aggravating it3, in other words, as dampening volatility
instead of ensuring a certain level of uncertainty. As will be discussed later, the relation-
ship between the proclaimed stance of the central bank, and the amount of uncertainty
it allows to occur around it, are an important consideration for monetary policy frame-
works.
It should be realised that this ‘leaning against the cycle’ is a good textbook con-
cept but translates into diffcult decisions in real life. A central bank looking to dampen
aggregate demand in a higher inflation situation may appear to be trying to manage
a macroscopic variable. The economic variable of lower aggregate demand, however,
translates into a loss of employment for a macroscopically significant number of work-
ers. Explaining to the affected families that their personal income levels need to be
reduced to protect the greater good of price stability is a difficult task, especially because
this apparent link suffers from a fallacy of decomposition. The central bank does not
terminate individual employment contracts, but merely changes probabilities.
In today’s world, this has led to a structural change in how central banks commu-
nicate with the public. In the not too recent past, central banks shrouded themselves
in an aura of mystique and revealed only a limited amount of information about the
motives behind their actions. Famously, the Fed did not even disclose its target rate
until February 1994 [33]. When the ECB started regular press conferences after Gov-
erning Council meetings, and later tied the meeting schedule to the press conference
schedule, this level of transparency was unique4. Today, even the Fed has regular press
conferences. To date, this increased level of transparency has not hurt the credibility of
central banks.
3Former Federal Reserve Chairman William McChesney Martin memorably described this task
as ‘to take away the punch bowl just as the party gets going’.
4Visitors to Frankfurt am Main may notice that the Bundesbank building is located on a hill at
some distance from the city centre while the original ECB building is very central. In this case,
the visible location choices are symbolic for communication approaches.

<!-- Page 4 -->
Monetary Policy
43
6.2
MONETARY POLICY UNDER INFLATION TARGETING
In order to discuss the impact of active monetary policy on inflation, it is instructive to
start from the basic quantity equation of the price level:
MV = PY
(6.1)
Here, M is the money stock, V the velocity of money, P the price level, and Y the total
volume of traded goods and services. For all practical purposes, Y can be thought of
as a proxy of GDP; the only difference between the two is changes to inventories. The
equation expresses simply that the total volume of things paid for during a given period
(PY) is equal to the money handed over in exchange (MV).
Solving for P and taking the total differential gives:
dP = M
Y dV + V
Y dM −MV
Y2 dY
(6.2)
The price level therefore depends on three control variables in this model: Higher
prices can be obtained by higher velocity of money, a larger money stock, or lower out-
put. Note that the total differential makes no assumption about correlation, or indeed
causal relationships, between the three control variables.
Economists generally agree only that the term dV is unsuitable for monetary policy
because it is impossible to control the way in which money is used in the economy.
V can react substantially to changes in investment climate as liquidity preferences
change. Beyond this point, economists split into monetarists and Keynesians5
according to the logical precedence assigned to the dM and dY terms.
A Keynesian economist views the dY term as central to official guidance of the
economy and there are many factors in which this term can be controlled, including
monetary policy. An important endogenous determinant of the near-term evolution
of dY is the current output gap, i.e., the difference between actual and potential
(however defined) output [22]. Because there is an assumption that the output gap is
mean-reverting to some degree6, monetary policy can use measures of the output gap
(unemployment rate, capacity utilisation, investment spending) as clues for monetary
policy. On this basis, the policy interest rate set by the central bank is determined
by the natural rate of interest for the economy r∗on the one hand, and the distance
of inflation from its target on the other. Keynesians regard the dM term as reacting
passively to dY. This view is supported by the observation that most of M in the usual
definitions (M2 and M3) is not central bank money, but monies created by commercial
banks. In the euro area, only about 10% of M3 are currency in circulation and bank
reserves (M0); the rest are largely deposits. However, changes in M can have effects
on the economy even in this framework, if largely through relative asset prices and
signalling. The difficulty of this approach is that it relies on unobservable variables,
such as the output gap, to judge the appropriate direction for monetary policy.
5Apologies to any economists who object to being subsumed into these two groups despite having
subtle but important differences with either. Neo-classical economics are subsumed here under
the Keynesian school.
6Mean-reversion is sometimes implicit in the use of Hodrick-Prescott filters in the estimation of
the output gap.

<!-- Page 5 -->
44
PRELIMINARIES
For monetarists, the dM term is paramount for central bankers because the dY term
is not subject to central bank control. The output gap is rejected as a monetary policy
indicator because it cannot reliably be measured in real time7. Monetarists agree that dY
has an influence on the price level; the contention is simply that a central bank should
not look to intervene in real variables8. In this world view, money growth dM is simply
given by a desired inflation level dP plus an a term that accounts for the growth in money
demand arising from economic growth dY and shifts in money usage (velocity), given
by dV. This is the theoretical background behind the money growth target approach
that was taken by the Bundesbank. As long as the coefficients of Equation (6.2) are rea-
sonably stable, a central bank that targets money growth is indistinguishable from one
that targets inflation [28]. The problem with money growth targeting is that the target
quantity must be reasonably wide so as to be less sensitive to short-term fluctuation
related to transaction money demand (which tends to be inside M0). Even so, there are
multiple reasons to hold money other than in order to spend it on goods and services.
All that being said, the left side of Equation (6.1) is somewhat of a fiction. There
are multiple definitions of M (M0–M3, M2+CD, base money) vying for the attention of
central bankers, and V is unobservable. The equation is therefore not much more than
a definition of V, rather than a useful guideline to monetary policy.
Brushing aside this technical difficulty, one finds central banks with inflation tar-
gets in agreement on a hierarchy of price level control, shown in the chart below:
Quantity (open market operations or lending)
⇓(III)
Price (interest rates on central bank money)
⇓(II)
Quantity (money supply)
⇓(I)
Price (goods and services)
(6.3)
Central banks control the price level of consumer goods by adjusting the money
supply M, ie., the quantity of money (I). This quantity cannot be controlled directly by
the central bank because most of M is not central bank money. Instead, central banks
control the demand for M (II) via interest rates (monetarist explanation) or signal their
stance on the real economy via interest rates (Keynesian explanation). The ECB refers to
(II) as the monetary transmission mechanism. Interest rates are simply a price of money
and by changing the price, central banks can look to influence demand for money.
Note that relationships (I) and (II) operate with a long and variable lag. The creation
of the money components outside M0 require decisions of private actors to borrow, and
changes in the availability of money may feed into price setting mechanisms only slowly,
given imperfect information and market rigidities. A useful benchmark is a lag of 12–18
months.
7This measurement problem explains why the Taylor rule works well as an ex-post explanation
of central bank action but much less well as a forecasting tool.
8The tradition of monetarism in Germany is part of the explanation of why the court cases filed
in that country against ECB monetary policy usually allege that the ECB oversteps the mandate
of a central bank by acting in ways that affect real variables, instead of only nominal ones. To a
Keynesian, it is absurd to assume that the two can be cleanly separated.

<!-- Page 6 -->
Monetary Policy
45
Given that there are two mutually exclusive intepretations of central banking, the
European Central Bank had to choose one to guide its own policy decisions when it was
set up in 1999. In line with the behaviour of other European institutions in similar situ-
ations it adopted both. The two pillars of the ECB policy framework are a monetarist M3
analysis and a potentially Keynesian inflation analysis. While the early chief economists
at the ECB used to interpret the second pillar narrowly and use output gap measures
mainly as a quality control tool of macro-economic forecasts, more recent communi-
cations put more emphasis on the ‘slack in the economy’ which can be interpreted as
Keynesianite references to the output gap9.
Under normal circumstances (standard monetary policy), some, but not all, cen-
tral banks control the relevant interest rates via quantities (III), namely the amount
of daily open market operations. The Fed and the Bank of Japan fall into this group;
the ECB uses a mix of instruments but under normal circumstances influences interest
rates directly via the minimum rate at which it allocates cash at the main refinancing
operations.
Demand for money can change due to purely technical factors such as tax and wage
payments, holiday gift shopping seasons, etc. At high frequencies money demand is not
perfectly responsive to policy interest rates10.
The alteration between quantity and prices in the control hierarchy Figure 6.3 can
cause breakdowns when for some reason one of the relationships no longer works as
anticipated. For instance, price levels may become insensitive to money supply when
households simply hoard cash. In the framework of Equation (6.2) one could find that:
M
Y dV = −V
Y dM
(6.4)
so that the effect of changing M would simply be offset by an opposing change of V.
Another way in which this relationship can break down is when V →0 which implies
𝜕P∕𝜕M →0. This situation arises when the general economy loses faith in the domestic
curreny and resorts to barter or the use of a substitute currency (dollarisation). Price
levels then become independent of the domestic money supply simply because domestic
money is no longer in use.
Two specific forms of Goodhart’s Law may apply to inflation targeting. The first is
that long-term inflation expectations of the public should, if the central bank is cred-
ible, converge to the central bank’s target. Public expectations of inflation would then
no longer be informative for policy makers as to the actual outlook for inflation which
would remain subject to various shocks and require monetary policy action. The second
is that some policy tools can affect market measures of future inflation such as deriva-
tives linked to future price level changes. In such cases, these market measures can also
become non-informative.
9Keen readers of the ECB’s Introductory Statements will note that the economic analysis comes
before the monetary analysis, both of which are then cross-checked.
10This is essentially why the Friedmanite episode of the Fed ended in failure (inelastic money
supply led to volatile market interest rates) and why the Bundesbank operated more as an
inflation-targeting central bank despite its professed money supply framework [28].

<!-- Page 7 -->
46
PRELIMINARIES
6.3
CENTRALBANK OPERATIONALFRAMEWORKS
Central banks can use various tools to control the supply of liquidity to private banks.
Each central bank will typically choose a subset of the available tools according to the
specific situation of its domestic banking market. The chosen set of tools and the way
the are implemented is called the operational framework of the central bank. Factors
such as the structure of the banking system, the size and structure of the relevant secu-
rities markets, and the relevance of net foreign trade can all influence the design of the
operational framework. Note that the framework itself need not be tied to a particular
monetary policy objective. The same objectives might be achieved with various frame-
works, and the same framework can be used for different, or changing, monetary policy
objectives.
In general, however, there are certain common desiderata for operational frame-
works (cf. e.g. [10]), as outlined below.
Parsimony Frameworks should not make use of an excessive number of distinct
instruments and instead have a small number of clearly understood mechanisms
to achieve standard aims (liquidity provision, liquidity absorption, emergency lend-
ing, etc.). A surfeit of instruments is likely to confuse market participants as to the
exact monetary policy objective inherent in the choice between two similar instru-
ments. Similarly, a central bank should avoid the simultaneous use of discretionary
instruments with opposing monetary effects.
Stability Operational frameworks can and should change over time to adapt to
changes in the operating environment. Changes to standard tools should, however,
not occur without a well-understood and well-communicated justification. One can
therefore observe a certain amount of hysteresis in how central banks interact with
the market as the side effects of a useful small adjustment may outweigh the poten-
tial benefits. It may be noted that the specific institutional setup of a central bank
itself is usually also the result of specific historic circumstances rather than the
result of an extended period of careful design [53].
Moderation Central banks must apply instruments in order to achieve the desired
effects but should do so with the minimum of disruption to private market interac-
tions. This is not only a question of of limited mandates, but has financial stability
effects. For instance, it is useful to force private banks to ‘test their name’ in the
private market on a regular basis, instead of providing liquidity to them from the
central bank, so as to gain insights as to the public opinion about their strength.
A potential drawback of moderation is that it creates a stigma for the use of
non-standard liquidity facilities, such as the Fed discount window or the ECB
dollar-providing operations. Banks may be reluctant to make use of such facilities
when there is a tacit or explicit understanding that doing so is a sign of crisis.
Given that risk premia charged by private funds providers are normally higher
than what a central bank can provide, avoiding the stigma of a central bank facility
will normally mean higher funding costs for the bank in question. Whether this

<!-- Page 8 -->
Monetary Policy
47
is in the long-term interest of financial stability is not an easy question to answer
and central banks take different stances on this issue.
Separation Instruments in the framework should be used for clearly defined pur-
poses, and these purposes should be clearly delineated. For instance, emergency
lending should be conducted in ways other than through regular lending operations
such as not to confuse the monetary policy signal of the latter.
The separation principle has been blamed for the slowness of the European
Central Bank in adopting non-standard monetary policy measures [47]. Such crit-
icism is probably misplaced because hesitation was a global feature of the use of
non-standard measures and may be linked to the dictum of then-chairman Ben
Bernanke ‘The problem with quantitative easing is that it works in practice, but
not in theory.’ Central bank models of the economy before the economic crisis that
started in 2008 generally suffered from a Keynesian disdain for financial matters
and did therefore not incorporate transmission channels of monetary policy that
are the hallmark of non-standard measures, namely bank equity and investment
portfolio allocations.
6.3.1
Symmetric interest rate corridors
Central banks outside crisis situations tend to operate in a setting that can be described
as a symmetric corridor system. In this setup, interbank interest rates fluctuate inside a
range, and central bank liquidity11 provision is minimal, designed to cover exactly the
aggregate needs created by bank notes, reserve requirements and transactional account
holdings of central bank cash. Such a system requires a minimum of three tools, namely
one to provide the bulk of liquidity, one to absorb any excess and a third to cover any
shortfalls. The interest rates on these three tools then describe the centre of the corridor,
and its lower and upper bounds.
Liquidity provision can take the form of regular auctions or open market oper-
ations. Where auctions are used, the volume supplied must match the banking
system demand at the desired interest rate. To judge this demand, all factors of
liquidity demand must be forecast, and particularly the demand for transactional
liquidity can be subject to large fluctuations.
When multiple liquidity-providing operations exist, their combined quantita-
tive effect needs to be taken into account. In principle, all of the banking system’s
aggregate liquidity needs should be exactly covered by these operations. Banks
should then distribute among themselves on a daily basis this liquidity to cover
individual requirements which fluctuate more than the aggregate demand.
Participation in the liquidity provision operations is ensured by keeping the
banking system structurally short liquidity. Traditionally, this has been achieved
through reserve requirements that force banks to borrow central bank funds which
11To recall, the term ‘liquidity’ is here used in the sense of central bank funds provided, generally
into current accounts held by commercial banks at the central bank. In the US, this is known as
‘reserves’.

<!-- Page 9 -->
48
PRELIMINARIES
then need to be kept at the central bank12. In today’s market, this requirement is
no longer necessary to generate bank demand for central bank liquidities as trans-
actional funds demand has risen.
Standing facilities can then be used to cover situations where liquidity does not
match expectations, either in aggregate or for individual banks. Excess liquidity can
be absorbed either in a specific facility (like the ECB’s Deposit Facility) or remu-
nerated at a lower rate (the Fed’s Interest on Excess Reserves). When aggregate
or individual needs exceed the amount of liquidity available, this can be covered
through a specific lending facility. In the case of the ECB, this is the Marginal Lend-
ing Facility and for the Federal Reserve the Discount Window.
The use of standing facilities should be the exception, not the norm. There are
two reasons for such usage. The first is unexpected liquidity demand, i.e., a forecast
error by the central bank. The risk of such errors occurring rises with the time hori-
zons of liquidity provision, so it is least for daily operations and higher for longer
ones. More concerning is a situation where both facilities are used at the same time
because that means that at least one bank has a liquidity surplus that it is unwilling
to lend to at least one other bank with a liquidity shortfall. The distance between
the interest rates on the two facilities should be large enough to discourage such
behaviour.
Stigmatisation of lending facilities outside the main operations is a constant topic
in money markets. On one hand, banks should trade among each other, and a reg-
ular use of standing facilities by any one bank can be sign of weakness. In the US,
recourse to the Discount Window has traditionally been seen as negative, although
at the time of writing the Federal Reserve is encouraging banks not to view it as
such. In a similar way, some of the long-term fund supplying operations of the ECB
were initially seen as stigmatised.
It should be noted that because the Fed’s Open Markets desk in principle con-
ducts daily operations, there should be less risk of an aggregate liqudidity shortfall.
Therefore, access to the Discount Window may more readily be seen as a sign of
individual, rather than aggregate, circumstances. In addition, the Eurosystem has
a designated instrument known as Emergency Liquidity Assistance that is reserved
for solvent banks with specific liquidity problems. The clear separation between
this instrument and the Marginal Lending facility may serve to de-stigmatise the
use of the latter.
During the financial crisis, it became obvious that the euro area interbank market
had become less efficient than before. As part of the response, the ECB narrowed the
interest rate corridor between the Marginal Lending and Deposit Facilities. In principle,
this lowers the cost to the banking system of using the Eurosystem balance sheet as a
12Traditionally, these reserves would be in specie, or be payable in specie by the central banks,
and serve to ensure that a bank can pay out specie on its liabilities on demand. This is the historic
reason why the US market refers to current account holdings at the Fed as reserves while the
European market simply refers to them as liquidity. In Japan, they are known as current account
holdings.

<!-- Page 10 -->
Monetary Policy
49
FIGURE 6.2
ECB deposit facility rate and pre-€STR and €STR. Source: From ECB SDW, ECB
deposit facility rate and pre-eSTR and eSTR. The information may be obtained free of charge
through: https://sdw.ecb.europa.eu/. © 2020, European Central Bank.
central counterparty in the money market. At the current juncture, however, there is
such a high level of excess liquidity in the system that the corridor is now of lesser
relevance, as will be discussed below.
6.3.2
Asymmetric lending corridors
With the financial crisis, and the wider adoption of non-standard monetary policy mea-
sures, most central banks’ operating frameworks have in principle become asymmet-
ric. In this setting, the market rate of interest does not fall in the middle of a corridor
between standing facility rates, but is instead permanently pinned to one side of the
corridor. Currently, this is the liquidity-absorbing side, i.e., its lower boundary.
In this setup, the level of liquidity in the banking system is no longer dependent
on main refinancing, or standard open market operations. Instead, the banking system
operates with a liqudity surplus generated by non-conventional liquidity injections.
One of the side effects of purchase programmes in particular is that central bank
reserves were injected in exchange for assets held by non-banks. The non-bank sector
therefore had an increasing need to desposit cash with commercial banks which low-
ered the rates at which such funds traded outside the banking system. This is visible,
for instance, in the euro short-term rate (€STR) which includes non-bank transactions
with banks and has been consistently below the ECB’s deposit facility rate since it has
been produced (cf. Figure 6.2). In the US, the Federal Reserve has introduced a new
facility, the overnight reverse repo (ON RRP) to absorb liquidity from a wider range of
counterparties in order to prevent market rates from falling below the target rate.
